Aqueous Humor Dynamics
======================

1.  Rate of fluid production = rate of fluid outflow or drainage (faucet
    and drain analogy)

2.  There is some resistance to fluid outflow at the iridocorneal angle;
    otherwise, the anterior chamber would collapse.

3.  This resistance to outflow results in an intraocular pressure of
    approximately 8-18 mmHg (will vary somewhat depending on what
    instrument is used to measure IOP).

4.  In accordance with Pascal’s law, IOP is equal throughout eye (i.e.,
    if IOP = 23 mmHg in anterior chamber, it’s also 23 mmHg in posterior
    chamber and vitreous cavity).

“Conventional” or “Trabecular” Outflow
--------------------------------------

1.  Nonpigmented epithelium of ciliary body

2.  Posterior chamber

3.  Through pupil

4.  Anterior chamber

5.  Iridocorneal angle

    1.  Pectinate ligaments

    2.  Trabecular Meshwork

6.  Intrascleral venous plexus

7.  Systemic circulation

“Unconventional” or “Uveoscleral” Outflow
-----------------------------------------

1.  Nonpigmented epithelium of ciliary body

2.  Absorption directly into uveal tissue

3.  Supraciliary space

4.  Sclera

5.  Systemic circulation

Definition of Glaucoma
======================

A group of diseases characterized by increased IOP, resulting in damage
to the ganglion cells / optic nerve. While we are going to talk a lot
about the cause of elevated IOP and ways to reduce it, I want you to
think of glaucoma, first and foremost, as a disease of the optic nerve
because it’s the optic nerve damage that results in blindness.

Classification of Glaucoma
==========================

Glaucoma can be classified in three ways:

1.  Depending on whether the glaucoma is a primary or secondary problem

2.  On the status of the iridocorneal angle

3.  On the duration of the glaucoma (i.e., acute vs. chronic)

Each specific case should be classified on the basis of all three when
possible….e.g., one could say that a given glaucoma case is an acute
case of primary glaucoma with a dysgenetic angle (i.e.,
goniodysgenesis).

The status of the angle is important because elevated IOP always due to
decreased aqueous humor outflow. While it would be logical to theorize
that glaucoma could also occur due to increased production of aqueous
humor, we don’t think this ever really occurs clinically

Angles are described by their morphologic appearance, which often
correlates with how well they function….i.e., a more open angle will
drain fluid more efficiently than a less open angle. But be aware that
this is not always the case; for example, there is a type of glaucoma
called Primary Open Angle Glaucoma (POAG) in which the angle is
morphologically perfectly normal, but fluid outflow is still severely
impeded because of a physiologic, not morphologic, dysfunction.

-   Open angle – the angle, as judged in degrees, is wide open. Usually
    appears to be approximately 40o or so between the cornea and iris.
    In addition, this description implies that the pectinate ligaments
    are properly formed.

-   Narrow angle – the angle is narrower than normal as a result of
    anterior displacement of the iris. Can occur as a primary problem
    with the iris, or due to the iris being pushed anteriorly by an
    enlarged lens. The angle also narrows with progression of
    goniodysgenetic glaucoma (see below).

-   Closed angle – the peripheral iris is in contact with the peripheral
    corneal endothelium, effectively obliterating the angle. Permanent
    adhesion between the peripheral iris and peripheral cornea is termed
    “peripheral anterior synechia” (PAS). The angle can close as a
    result of the progression of goniodysgenesis or as a feature of just
    about anything that causes secondary glaucoma (see below).

-   Goniodysgenesis – This is a congenital angle defect we’ll discuss
    below. Hard to know where to put it in this scheme. Some people keep
    it out as a separate category (ie., a dog’s angle can be open,
    narrow, closed or dysgenetic) while other folks consider it a form
    of closed angle. Might be easier on your brains to consider it as a
    separate form of angle abnormality because dogs with dysgenesis can
    go on to narrow and/or close their angles in the more “traditional”
    sense as described above.

Primary Glaucomas
=================

-   Goniodysgenesis (also called pectinate ligament dysplasia): a solid
    sheet of tissue (usually with a few “flow holes”) is present in
    place of pectinate ligaments. Aqueous cannot exit through this
    separate sheet of tissue rapidly enough, so if aqueous production
    stays constant IOP will rise. Your text separates goniodysgenesis
    out as a cause of a separate category of glaucoma, congenital
    glaucoma. I think that’s misleading because while the angle
    abnormality is congenital, the glaucoma develops later in life.
    Breeds commonly afflicted with primary glaucoma include cocker
    spaniel, chow, siberian husky, sharpei, and bassett hound. I suggest
    thinking of goniodysgenesis as a type of closed angle (again, some
    separate goniodysgenesis from closed angles). Hence, dogs with
    glaucoma and goniodysgenesis have primary angle closure glaucoma
    (PACG).

-   Narrow angle glaucoma: angle (in degrees) formed between iris and
    cornea progressively decreases with age. This results in more
    resistance to outflow than normal, and therefore raises IOP. As IOP
    increases, angle narrows further, and may eventually collapse
    causing a sudden and dramatic spike in pressure. In dogs with
    goniodysgenesis, the angle often narrows as IOP increases. In my
    opinion a narrow angle alone (without predisposing goniodysgenesis)
    does not raise IOP in dogs.

-   Open angle glaucoma: the angle is morphologically normal, but there
    is a functional retardation in the transmission of aqueous from the
    trabecular meshwork into the intrascleral venous plexus. This is far
    and away the most common cause of glaucoma in humans, but
    essentially never happens in dogs. This glaucoma is usually referred
    to as POAG (primary open angle glaucoma).

-   Primary glaucomas have strong breed predilections and are
    essentially always bilateral, although the IOP elevation in the two
    eyes generally doesn’t occur at exactly the same time (may be months
    to years between first eye and second eye).

Secondary Glaucomas
===================

-   Uveitis

-   Anterior lens luxation

-   Hyphema

-   Intraocular tumors

-   Pigmentary glaucoma of Westies

-   Pigmentary glaucoma of Golden Retriever

-   Most of the secondary glaucomas can be unilateral or bilateral. The
    pigmentary glaucomas, however, are almost always secondary.

Duration of disease
===================

-   The length of time that the IOP elevation has been present is an
    important part of the classification scheme because it is the single
    most important determinant of therapy. We will cover this in detail
    later, but the general concept is that animals with glaucoma need
    treatment for two reasons: glaucoma is blinding, and glaucoma hurts.

-   The blindness is due to retinal ganglion cell damage (which is
    equivalent to saying optic nerve damage….it should be clear to you
    why these are equivalent statements), and this damage becomes
    permanent within hours to days depending on how high the IOP is.

-   If you think duration is relatively short (say, a few weeks at most,
    but preferably less than one day) you should be therapeutically
    aggressive in an effort to salvage vision.

-   But if the duration is more chronic, a completely different set of
    “salvage” options (such as enucleation) become viable to simply
    alleviate the discomfort.

-   The disappointing, unvarnished truth is that the vast majority of
    both primary and secondary glaucomas are already relatively chronic
    by the time the animal’s guardian knows there’s a problem, so
    retention of vision is relatively uncommon. We will talk about how
    to differentiate chronic from acute later.

Diagnostic Techniques
=====================

Tonometry
---------

There are three types of tonometers in common use in veterinary clinics
at present:

1.  Applanation tonometers: Most common example is the TonoPen™ (or it’s
    more recent incarnation, the TonoPen Avia™).

    Principle: the circular tip of the instrument has a defined surface
    area. It is advanced towards the cornea and pressed until the
    instrument senses that the cornea has been flattened (or
    “applanated”) by that same surface area. A transducer in the
    handpiece then measures how hard you’ve had to push to flatten the
    cornea by that amount, and then calculates the pressure in the eye
    that must have been pushing back against you (i.e., the IOP). Very
    easy to use, very reliable. Can be a bit persnickety until you get
    the hang of it. Pretty expensive (in the $1800 - $4000 range
    depending on model and new vs. used). Requires topical anesthetic.

2.  Rebound tonometer: Most common example is the TonoVet™.

    Principle: a little probe with a round plastic tip is thrown at the
    cornea, and the probe then rebounds off the cornea back into the
    instrument. The instrument measures the speed of the rebound, and
    calculates IOP from that speed. Does not require topical anesthetic,
    and fractious animals tend to object less to this instrument than to
    the TonoPen. Only disadvantage is that it must be held with probe
    parallel to the floor. Generally felt to be more accurate than the
    TonoPen, but in my view the difference is negligible. Cost is around
    $3500.

3.  Indentation tonometer: Most common example is the Schiotz tonometer.

    Principle: A known weight is placed on the surface of the cornea
    (the “base” weight is 5.5 gm). The distance that this weight can
    indent the cornea is measured. The IOP is determined from a table of
    values of indentation distance vs. IOP. If indentation distance is
    0, a weight is added to give more chance of providing some degree of
    indentation. To use the Schiotz the dog must be sitting down and
    looking straight up, and requires topical anesthetic. Definitely the
    least convenient of the three methods, but not really that bad once
    you get used to it. Costs in the $200 - $500 range.

**A few things to bear in mind about tonometry**

1.  First, there is no single number that is “normal.” Rather, we have
    the concept of a normal range, which will vary a little depending on
    which tonometer you use. Let’s go with a range of 8-18 mmHg as being
    “normal,” knowing that any individual reading may be normal or
    abnormal for a given dog depending on other clinical signs.

2.  Second, none of these tonometers actually measures IOP….rather, they
    all estimate IOP. Because they all make these estimates by different
    methods, they will usually give slightly different results. But they
    are all close enough for our purposes to be considered equivalent.

3.  Third, your text implies that the Schiotz is unacceptable for
    veterinary ophthalmology…..HOGWASH! This is a great instrument, and
    is far more affordable than the others. However, because of the
    inconvenience associated with its use most veterinarians prefer the
    TonoPen or TonoVet.

4.  Fourth, your text mentions a few other tonometers…..pneumotonometer,
    Goldmann tonometer, eye puff tonometer…we’re not going to include
    these in our discussions. Veterinary ophthalmologists don’t use
    these instruments routinely.

Gonioscopy
----------

Direct visualization of the canine iridocorneal angle isn’t possible
because the geometry of the cornea doesn’t allow light reflected off the
angle to exit the eye. Rather, is it completely reflected back into the
eyeball. In gonioscopy a large silicone or plastic lens is placed on the
cornea to get around this problem. Visualization of the angle allows for
detection of goniodysgenesis, PAS, angle tumors, etc. This assessment
can often have prognostic value. In all honesty, this technique is as
much art as science, and as such GPs don’t do it enough to make it worth
their while. It is pretty much relegated to the ophthalmologist.

Ophthalmoscopy
--------------

The appearance of the retina and optic nerve is prognostically
important. Optic disc cupping is when the disc of a glaucoma patient is
depressed caudally due to elevated IOP and compression of the lamina
cribrosa (if you don’t recall the lamina, please review notes from the
anatomy lab). Cupping generally implies at least some degree of
chronicity. With even more chronicity the nerve actually becomes
atrophic, in which the nerve head appears small, dark, and scalloped. In
addition, chronic cases may have wedge-shaped areas of hyperreflectivity
called “watershed” lesions which may represent ischemia of short ciliary
arteries.

High resolution ultrasound
--------------------------

High resolution ultrasound of the angle, tonography, and provocative
testing (either water or steroid provocation) are all informative but
aren’t routinely pursued clinically.

Clinical and Pathologic Effects of Elevated IOP
===============================================

Make note of which clinical signs are **only** seen with chronicity

Vision  
Can be blind or visual, depending on how high the pressure is and how
sensitive the individual’s optic nerve is. If blind, vision may or may
not be restorable, with the primary determinant of vision being how
chronic the IOP elevation is.

Retina and optic nerve  
Glaucoma destroys retinal ganglion cells and optic nerve; mechanism
probably combination of vascular and mechanical. Elevated IOP eventually
affects all parts of the eye, but these inner retinal elements are the
most sensitive. Clinically, these changes are eventually manifested as
optic disc cupping and optic nerve atrophy; you generally won’t see
cupping or atrophy until the case is somewhat chronic. With high enough
IOPs and enough chronicity, outer retinal elements also become affected.

-   Among the things that bite about having a patient with glaucoma,
    perhaps the worst is that in many cases (in fact, probably most
    cases) once optic nerve degeneration has commenced it can continue
    unabated even if IOP is successfully returned to normal.

-   Hence, in the future major therapeutic efforts will go beyond simply
    normalizing IOP and will include some sort of therapy aimed
    specifically at protecting the optic nerve as well……see
    “Neuroprotective Therapy” below.

Cornea  
Edema of the stroma; pressure induced damage to endothelial cells and
hydrostatic forcing of aqueous into cornea both contribute to edema.
With buphthalmia (see below), Haab’s striae (i.e., break’s in descemet’s
membrane) and exposure keratitis associated with lagophthalmia…thus,
Haab’s striae and exposure keratitis are associated with chronicity.

Ciliary body  
Ciliary body destruction occurs with chronicity, resulting in reduced
aqueous formation and reduction of IOP.

Pupil  
Mydriasis due to ischemic necrosis of the iris sphincter muscle

Globe and fibrous tunic  
Buphthalmia (i.e., enlargement of the globe); sclera stretches and thins
in response to the increased pressure. This is a sign of chronicity, and
by the time the globe is enlarged you can be about 99% certain that the
optic nerve is already toast by the time buphthalmia occurs. Also
injection of episcleral vasculature as increased pressure inside eye
shunts venous return to more superficial episcleral vessels.

Lens  
Subluxation due to ciliary zonules rupture secondary to buphthalmia
(therefore this is also a sign of chronicity). Beware: while glaucoma
can cause luxation, luxation can also cause glaucoma. We will discuss
how to differentiate when we discuss lens disease.

Aqueous humor  
Will occasionally see flare, probably due to pressure-induced damage to
the blood aqueous barrier. Note that this is an exception to the maxim
that flare is pathognomonic for anterior uveitis

Iridocorneal angle  
In dogs with goniodysgenesis angle will gradually narrow and close with
chronicity. Unfortunately you’re not really going to know this is
occurring because it’s unlikely gonioscopy will be part of your ocular
diagnostic arsenal, but it’s not going to change your therapeutic
approach anyway.

Pain  
Ocular and/or systemic. Recent information suggests that pain is not so
much associated with any particular IOP, but rather with how quickly IOP
rises.

Primary Glaucoma
================

The section on primary glaucoma in your text is, in my opinion,
unnecessarily confusing. Don’t get bogged down on the details of the
Zurich study vs. the Utrecht study, etc.

Goniodysgenesis
---------------

Your text also refers to this condition as pectinate ligament dysplasia,
and you can treat these as synonymous terms. There is a strong breed
predisposition for goniodysgenesis, with Bassets, Cockers, Chows,
Bostons, Huskies, Akitas, Danes and Shar Peis being the most common
offenders. However, any breed, and even mixed breeds, can be affected
with goniodysgenesis. There is a female predilection for
goniodysgenesis, and most dogs are in the 4-8 yr. range when initially
diagnosed (although I have seen dogs in their teens when first
diagnosed). In utero, all dogs have a solid sheet of tissue in the plane
of the adult pectinates. Beginning about 2 weeks prepartum, and
continuing up until about 2 weeks postpartum, this sheet of tissue
undergoes a process of rarefaction in which the only tissue left behind
are the pectinates. In goniodysgenesis, this rarefaction process is
aborted, leaving the sheet of tissue (usually with attempts at flow hole
formation) where the pectinates should have been. It is strongly
suspected that goniodysgenesis is inherited, although the mode of
inheritance has not been identified nor has any causative gene. In the
early stages of PACG due to goniodysgenesis, the clinical signs are
subtle and may be limited to mild hyperemia and perhaps mild corneal
edema. Even if these dogs are lucky enough to be presented to a
veterinarian at this stage, it is often the case that IOPs are not
measured at this juncture thus missing a potential opportunity to extend
the time of useful vision….thus, it is imperative that every dog who
presents to you with a red, cloudy eye must have IOP measured! With
persistence of high IOP, and possibly due to idiopathic intermittent
higher spikes of IOP, episcleral injection and severe edema with
blindness ensues. In the vast majority of cases, by the time these cases
present to the veterinarian it is too late to restore vision.

Narrow angle glaucoma
---------------------

Indicates that the angle in degrees between the iris and the cornea is
less than normal, and it is logical that such a situation would retard
outflow and raise IOP. Although debatable, I don’t believe narrow angle
glaucoma really occurs as a primary glaucoma syndrome in dogs. When we
see narrow angles I feel that they represent a secondary progression of
goniodysgenetic angles.

Open angle glaucoma
-------------------

The angle is morphologically normal, but there is functional retardation
of outflow at the level of the intrascleral venous plexus (we think).
Not really seen clinically in dogs with any degree of regularity. When
it does occur, it’s almost exclusively seen in the beagle, and beagles
in purpose-bred experimental colonies at that. POAG in beagles is
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, and is due to a mutation on a
gene called ADAMTS10.

Primary glaucoma and breed
--------------------------

The many pages in your text devoted to individual breeds and primary
glaucoma can be summed as follows: primary glaucomas in most breeds are
associated with some degree of goniodysgenesis. It is true that many
dogs can have variable degrees of goniodysgenesis and never suffer from
elevated IOP, but most dogs with primary glaucoma have large areas of
goniodysgenesis. The “poster child” breeds for glaucoma due to
goniodysgenesis are the Basset Hound, Cocker Spaniel, Boston Terrier,
Chow, and Siberian Husky. POAG is pretty much limited to the Beagle, and
even there it’s pretty much exclusively found in purpose bred research
colonies (i.e., you’re not going to see these in clinical practice).

Secondary Glaucoma
==================

Secondary glaucoma is elevation in IOP associated with some other
primary condition that obstructs aqueous outflow. For example, in dogs
with chronic uveitis, inflammatory debris and fibrovascular membranes
both obstruct the angle leading to elevated IOP. Obviously, in addition
to aiming treatments at reducing IOP, efforts must be made to alleviate
whatever the primary cause is.

Causes of secondary glaucoma
----------------------------

Secondary glaucoma is elevation in IOP associated with some other
primary condition that obstructs aqueous outflow. For example, in dogs
with chronic uveitis, inflammatory debris and fibrovascular membranes
both obstruct the angle leading to elevated IOP. Obviously, in addition
to aiming treatments at reducing IOP, efforts must be made to alleviate
whatever the primary cause is.

### Uveitis

Anterior uveal inflammation can cause retardation of aqueous outflow by
several mechanisms.

-   You should be familiar with causes of uveitis from the first part of
    the course.

-   Peripheral anterior synechia (PAS) – Peripheral iris adheres to
    peripheral corneal, thus obliterating the iridocorneal angle and
    resulting in decreased outflow. Such angles are, then, by definition
    closed angles.

-   Iris bombé - Syndrome of 360o posterior synechiae of the pupil to
    the lens. Aqueous from ciliary body builds up in posterior chamber
    because it can’t get through pupil. Peripheral iris then balloons
    forward and angle collapses, resulting in PAS and IOP elevation.
    Again, these are closed angles.

-   Clogging of pectinates and trabecular meshwork with inflammatory
    cells and inflammatory debris

-   Formation of preiridial fibrovascular membranes (PIFMs) – can grow
    across pupil, causing “pupillary block” and also across angle
    retarding outflow.

### Lens luxation

-   Lens luxation means displacement of lens associated with breakage of
    lens zonules

-   Luxations are classified by relationship of lens to iris: lens in
    front of iris, anterior luxation; lens behind iris, posterior
    luxation.

-   Subluxation: lens zonules are partially disrupted so lens is loose
    but not completely out of position

-   If lens luxates into the anterior chamber (and on occasion even if
    it stays posterior to the iris) it can occlude the angle and cause
    IOP elevation.

-   Lens luxation can cause glaucoma (this would be primary luxation
    with secondary glaucoma), but lens luxation can also be caused by
    glaucoma (in which case the luxation would be secondary; the
    glaucoma in these circumstances can be primary or secondary). So how
    do you tell which came first?

    -   It’s not always easy!

    -   In general, if luxation is primary it’s usually in a predisposed
        breed (typically terriers, esp. Jack Russell) and luxation is
        anterior

    -   If luxation is secondary to glaucoma, it occurs because the
        zonules break as a result of stretching in association with
        buphthalmia (i.e., if the globe isn’t buphthalmic, the luxation
        isn’t secondary)

    -   In general, when the glaucoma is secondary to luxation the
        luxation is posterior and is generally actually a subluxation.

    -   Understand that it is possible to have a luxation that is
        secondary to a secondary glaucoma….for example, severe uveitis →
        synechiae, PIFMs, bombe, etc → IOP elevates (i.e., secondary
        glaucoma) → with chronicity, globe becomes buphthalmic → zonules
        break → luxation.

    -   It has recently been suggested that the same gene that codes for
        primary lens lux also can code (in some circumstances) for
        POAG….well, that bites, because then even appropriate treatment
        of the primary lux doesn’t guarantee that glaucoma won’t occur
        anyway. So here’s a situation in which both the lens lux and the
        glaucoma are primary!

-   Lenses can luxate for reasons other than primary and secondary to
    glaucoma….we’ll talk more about these (as well as lens lux therapy)
    in the lecture on lens disease.

### Aphakic/Pseudophakic glaucoma

-   Glaucoma secondary to cataract surgery

    -   Note that not every post-cataract surgery IOP elevation is
        glaucoma per se; some are simply postoperative ocular
        hypertension (see below)

-   Easily the most common cataract surgery complication (reports of up
    to 15% of cataract surgery cases)

-   Pathogenesis unclear. Probably involves postoperative uveitis, with
    various degrees of pupil block, PIFM formation, inflammatory debris,
    etc.

-   Breed predispositions: Bostons, Cockers, Shih Tzus; unclear why
    these breeds develop glaucoma after cataract surgery more than
    others.

### Post-cataract surgery ocular hypertension

-   Differentiated from aphakic/pseudophakic glaucoma because it is a
    transient rise that occurs in the immediate postoperative period

-   It is unknown whether or not this transient IOP rise is enough to
    damage the optic nerve, and it is also unclear whether or not dogs
    with postop ocular hypertension are at risk to become
    “`aphakic/pseudophakic glaucoma`” dogs later down the road.

-   Can occur anytime in the first 24 hrs post op, but most will occur
    4-8 hours postop.

### Hyphema

-   Blood in the anterior chamber

-   Common causes: retinal detachment, chronic uveitis, clotting
    disorders, trauma, intraocular tumors

-   Erythrocytes and macrophages laden with erythrocytes clog angle

### Intraocular tumors

-   Tumor itself can clog angle

-   Also, intraocular tumors can spontaneously bleed (see hyphema above)

### Melanocytic glaucoma of Cairn Terriers (aka pigmentary glaucoma of CT)

-   Idiopathic accumulation of melanocytes/melanophages in sclera and
    angle

-   Obstructs outflow

-   Chronic, smoldering IOP elevation

-   Exceedingly difficult to treat successfully

### Pigmentary glaucoma of Golden Retrievers

-   Begins as an idiopathic accumulation of pigment, usually in a
    spokelike fashion on the anterior lens capsule

-   Most cases have iris cysts, which can be confusing because lots of
    Goldens have perfectly benign cysts

-   Also includes idiopathic accumulation of proteinaceous debris on
    lens capsule and in the anterior chamber – therefore these dogs
    sometimes have flare. Some ophthalmologists (myself included) think
    this material may be exuding from the cysts.

-   This was initially thought to be a uveitic syndrome because the
    proteinaceous debris causes flare.

-   As with the Cairn Terrier syndrome, treatment is frustrating and
    usually unsuccessful

#### Other comments:

Most of the secondary glaucomas can be unilateral or bilateral. The
pigmentary glaucomas, however, are almost often bilateral.

Secondary glaucomas are generally more difficult to bring under control
than primary glaucomas (not that the primaries are easy to treat
either!).

Therapy
-------

Glaucoma does two bad things: (1) it causes blindness, and (2) it hurts.
So the first order of business with a glaucomatous dog is to determine
your goal: restoring/preserving vision vs. making dog comfortable.

-   Remember that the primary focus of glaucoma therapy is lowering IOP.
    All IOP-lowering therapies must either reduce aqueous production or
    increase aqueous outflow.

-   Can vision be restored?

    -   Is vision currently present?

    -   How long has pressure been elevated? Signs of chronicity?
        Buphthalmia? Posterior lens subluxation? Optic disc cupping or
        optic nerve atrophy?

    -   Glaucoma can cause irreversible vision loss in a matter of days,
        depending on the severity of IOP elevation.

If goal is maintaining vision, treat as an emergency!

### Emergency therapy

**Prostanoid eye drops**

-   The mechanism of action of these agents in dogs is unknown, but
    probably includes reduction of aqueous production AND increase of
    both trabecular and uveoscleral outflow.

-   A very potent IOP-lowering class of drugs in dogs

-   Rapid acting. Demonstrable effect within 1-2 hrs.

-   Latanoprost, bimatoprost, travaprost

**Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors**

The following reaction occurs in the ciliary nonpigmented epithelium and
is important in the production of aqueous humor:

-   H<sub>2</sub>O + CO<sub>2</sub> ←→ H<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> ←→
    HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> + H<sup>+</sup>

-   Both reactions are catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase, so inhibition of
    CA results in reduced aqueous production.

The primary topical CAI is dorzolamide

-   Very potent, although probably a notch behind prostanoids in this
    regard

-   Takes effect within 1-2 hrs

-   Stings a bit on instillation

Also available as orals

-   Methazolamide, dichlorphenamide

-   Lots of side effects when administered systemically

-   These days we generally use a combination product that contains both
    dorzolamide and the β–blocker timolol (see below). Of the two agents
    in this product, the dorzolamide is doing most of the work The
    proprietary name of this produce tis CoSopt.

**Osmotic diuretics**

-   Mannitol, 1 gm/\# slowly IV (over 30-60 minutes)

-   Withhold oral water for 2 hours.

-   Works by dehydrating eye and reducing ocular volume. Rapid onset (30
    minutes), short duration (6 hours), and very potent

If emergency medical therapy fails, surgery may be needed on an
emergency basis. Surgical procedures are described below with
maintenance medical therapy

Once IOP is reduced, commence maintenance therapy to keep IOP down

If IOP elevation is secondary to anterior lens luxation, emergency lens
removal is indicated.

### Maintenace medical therapy

1.  Latanoprost (or other prostanoid). Usually a BID therapy

2.  CoSopt. Usually a BID therapy

3.  Timolol

    1.  Topical beta-blocker; reduces aqueous production. Apply BID.

    2.  Not a very potent IOP-lowering agent

    3.  Usually reserved for when IOP is close to OK, and you only need
        a few more mmHg.

4.  The above agents can be (and often are) used together

### Maintenace surgical therapy

-   Many dogs will either not respond to medical therapy or will
    initially respond and then become refractory to medical therapy.

-   If surgery is going to be needed it is most effective if employed
    before significant optic nerve damage has been done.

-   Cyclodestructive procedures - reduce aqueous production;
    cyclocryosurgery (i.e., freezing) or cyclophotocoagulation (i.e.,
    laser)

-   Drainage procedures. The primary procedure in this category is the
    gonioimplant. These procedures facilitate aqueous outflow. Primary
    problem is postoperative fibrosis of surgically created outflow
    path. The advent of perioperative antifibrotic drugs has reduced the
    incidence of this complication.

-   The prognosis for long term maintenance of vision is always bleak.
    However, the newer drainage procedures in conjunction with
    antifibrosis medication has resulted in maintenance of vision for
    several years in some cases.

### Neuroprotective therapy

All of the therapies just listed are aimed at reducing intraocular
pressure. But as you’ll recall from the beginning of this topic, the
optic nerve can continue to degenerate even if IOP is brought under
control. Thus, the chief focus of modern glaucoma research is optic
nerve protection. We currently have no “gold standard” for accomplishing
this, but many things are on the drawing board that may well become
clinical realities during your practice lifetimes, including:

1.  NMDA antagonists

2.  Tetrahydrocannabinol

3.  Calcium channel blockers

4.  Gingko biloba

### Salvage procedures

If goal is simply to make animal comfortable following irrevocable
vision loss due to glaucoma:

-   Enucleation; few complications, assures no further eye problems

-   Evisceration with silicone prosthesis; few complications, but dog
    does retain cornea, conjunctiva, third eyelid, and lid margins, and
    can therefore still experience future problems with those structures
    (e.g. KCS, lid tumor, conjunctivitis, etc.) Strictly contraindicated
    in glaucoma secondary to infection or neoplasia

-   Intravitreal gentamicin injection; destroys ciliary body; often
    results in phthisis bulbi; a small percentage of dogs become
    chronically painful, necessitating enucleation. May be a good
    alternative when financial constraints are tight or animal is
    anesthetic risk. Strictly contraindicated in glaucoma secondary to
    infection or neoplasia.

-   Cyclocryosurgery - quick, easy inexpensive, but IOP may re-elevate

-   Chronic medical therapy (i.e., latanoprost, CoSopt, etc) - when
    owner is adamantly against surgery.

Prognosis for opposite eye
--------------------------

Poor if glaucoma is primary. Usually presents unilaterally with second
eye becoming affected within 8 months. Should consider prophylactic
therapy of unaffected eye when patient presents for treatment of first
eye, as the time to onset in the second eye is (on average) nearly 3
years when treated with timolol as a “`preventative.`”
