## Eyelid Anatomy and Physiology

The eyelids protect the globe from injury as well as distribute the tear
film.

The eyelids have haired skin on the outside layer and are lined on the
inside with conjunctiva. The eyelid margin is a specialized location
between the skin and conjunctiva. Meibomian gland openings reside here
and exude the lipid layer of the tear film. The margin gives the
palpebral fissure its form and must be normal for normal eyelid function
and associated corneal health.

CN 7 is necessary for eyelid closure via the orbicularis oculi m. and CN
3 activates the levator palbepbrae to open the eyelid.

## Ankyloblepharon

The fusion of the upper and lower eyelids. This is normal for the first
10-15 days of life in some mammals. If the eyelids open prematurely the
cornea may dry as the tear glands are not completely developed.
Lubricants will be needed until 2 weeks after birth.

Diseases of the eyelids previously covered . Entropion . Distichia .
Ectopic cilia

## Trichiasis

Normal hair that rubs the cornea, often seen with prominent facial folds
or aberrant dermis

Treatment

- Train hair away with petroleum jelly; do a pocket medial canthoplasty or facial fold resection

## Ectropion

Eversion of eyelid, seen in Bloodhound, Bassett, Cockers, St. Bernard.
Clinical signs are eversion of eyelid, chronic conjunctivitis, ocular
discharge, +/- keratitis.

Treatment: None is usually needed unless keratitis is present

- Medical: intermittent topical corticosteroids

- Surgery: modified Kuhnt-Symanowski procedure – V to Y plasty

## Combined ectropion

Entropion (Pagoda lid, diamond eye): Predisposed breeds are St. Bernard,
Newfoundland, English bulldog, Cocker, Bloodhound.

Clinical Signs

- Entropion laterally and medially with central ectropion, +/-
  keratitis, chronic conjunctivitis, discharge.

Treatment

- Usually none, but several surgical procedures are described.

## Lagophthalmia

Failure to blink completely. Sometimes due to facial nerve paralysis,
but more commonly seen in brachycephalics as a conformational problem.
The orbits in these dogs are so shallow that the eyeballs protrude
anteriorly – so-called “physiologic exophthalmos.”

Treatment (if necessary)

- Medial canthoplasty. A surgical procedure that shortens the
  palpebral fissure. In short, the nasal few mm of the superior and
  inferior lids are freshened and sutured together. By shortening the
  palpebral fissure each blink covers more of the cornea, thus
  reducing the lagophthalmia. As added bonuses this procedure also
  eliminates medial canthal entropion and medial aberrant dermis.

## Medial aberrant dermis

Small breeds often have a small piece of dermis in the medial canthus of
the eye, and hairs often emanate from this piece of dermis. Due to their
location, these hairs can irritate the nasal aspect of the cornea
leading to pigmentation, but they are often asymptomatic if they are the
only ocular abnormality.

Treatment

- Medial canthoplasty.

## Ophthalmia neonatorum

Infection (usually staph) under fused lids prior to the lids opening.
Lids are swollen, a purulent exudate may be evident. Pup or kitten is
older than 14 days.

Treatment

- Warm compresses are placed, the lid margin is split carefully with
  blunt scissors and the conjunctiva is flushed. Check for ulcers.
  Treat with topical antibiotic based on culture and sensitivity.

## Eyelid masses

1.  Chalazion: Granulomatous inflammation of the tarsal gland/glands.
    Localized mass beneath conjunctival surface, middle-aged dogs.

    - Treatment

      - Warm compresses, topical antibiotics/dex, lance the
        chalazion through a small incision on conjunctiva

2.  Neoplasia: Tarsal gland adenomas predominate - &gt; 90% of tumors
    are benign. By far the most common one is an adenoma arising from
    the Meibomian glands. Occasionally papillomas and melanomas are
    seen, both of which also behave relatively benignly. More rarely,
    malignancies such as mast cell tumor, squamous cell carcinoma,
    hemangiosarcoma, and fibrosarcoma will be encountered. The main
    problem induced by the benign tumors is that if they get large
    enough they will interfere with lid function, induce keratitis and
    conjunctivitis from rubbing on the ocular surface, and sometimes
    cause superficial ulcers (also from abrading the cornea).

    - Diagnosis

      - Biopsy is the only sure way to diagnose. Usually an
        excisional biopsy is done.

    - Treatment

      - 1/3 of the eyelid margin can safely be removed without
        decreasing function. If &gt;1/3 of the margin needs to be
        removed, then blepharoplastic procedures need to be done.
        For small tumors a wedge resection or pentagonal excision is
        done. The details of how to perform a wedge resection can be
        found in the “Surgical Techniques” notes as well as in
        texts. Accurate closure of the margin with the figure-8
        suture is of utmost importance to prevent postoperative
        corneal irritation and/or ulceration.

## Eyelid lacerations

Because of the tremendous blood supply, only minimal debridement should
be done if at all. Immediate repair is a necessity to prevent tissue
loss. Place the figure-8 margin suture first. Two layer closure is
needed for long lacerations. Make sure no sutures penetrate the
conjunctiva.
